Friends and fellow Americans: I humbly and gratefully accept your nomination for the presidency of the United States . Together , we will lead our party back to the White House , and we will lead our country back to safety , prosperity , and peace . We will be a country of generosity and warmth . But we will also be a country of law and order .

Our Convention occurs at a moment of crisis for our nation . The attacks on our police , and the terrorism in our cities , threaten our very way of life . Any politician who does not grasp this danger is not fit to lead our country .

Americans watching this address tonight have seen the recent images of violence in our streets and the chaos in our communities . Many have witnessed this violence personally , some have even been its victims .

I have a message for all of you: the crime and violence that today afflicts our nation will soon come to an end . Beginning on January 20th 2017 , safety will be restored .

The most basic duty of government is to defend the lives of its own citizens . Any government that fails to do so is a government unworthy to lead .

It is finally time for a straightforward assessment of the state of our nation .

I will present the facts plainly and honestly . We cannot afford to be so politically correct anymore .

So if you want to hear the corporate spin , the carefully crafted lies , and the media myths the Democrats are holding their convention next week .

But here , at our convention , there will be no lies . We will honor the American people with the truth , and nothing else .

These are the facts:

Decades of progress made in bringing down crime are now being reversed by this Administration's rollback of criminal enforcement .

Homicides last year increased by 17% in America's fifty largest cities . That's the largest increase in 25 years . In our nation's capital , killings have risen by 50 percent . They are up nearly 60% in nearby Baltimore .

In the President's hometown of Chicago , more than 2 ,000 have been the victims of shootings this year alone . And more than 3 ,600 have been killed in the Chicago area since he took office .

The number of police officers killed in the line of duty has risen by almost 50% compared to this point last year . Nearly 180 ,000 illegal immigrants with criminal records , ordered deported from our country , are tonight roaming free to threaten peaceful citizens .

The number of new illegal immigrant families who have crossed the border so far this year already exceeds the entire total from 2015 . They are being released by the tens of thousands into our communities with no regard for the impact on public safety or resources .

One such border crosser was released and made his way to Nebraska . There , he ended the life of an innocent young girl named Sarah Root . She was 21 years old , and was killed the day after graduating from college with a 4 .0 Grade Point Average . Her killer was then released a second time , and he is now a fugitive from the law .

I've met Sarah's beautiful family . But to this Administration , their amazing daughter was just one more American life that wasn't worth protecting . One more child to sacrifice on the altar of open borders . What about our economy?

Again , I will tell you the plain facts that have been edited out of your nightly news and your morning newspaper: Nearly Four in 10 African American children are living in poverty , while 58% of African American youth are not employed . 2 million more Latinos are in poverty today than when the President took his oath of office less than eight years ago . Another 14 million people have left the workforce entirely .

Household incomes are down more than $4 ,000 since the year 2000 . Our manufacturing trade deficit has reached an all time high  nearly $800 billion in a single year . The budget is no better .

President Obama has doubled our national debt to more than $19 trillion , and growing . Yet , what do we have to show for it? Our roads and bridges are falling apart , our airports are in Third World condition , and forty three million Americans are on food stamps .

Now let us consider the state of affairs abroad .

Not only have our citizens endured domestic disaster , but they have lived through one international humiliation after another . We all remember the images of our sailors being forced to their knees by their Iranian captors at gunpoint .

This was just prior to the signing of the Iran deal , which gave back to Iran $150 billion and gave us nothing  it will go down in history as one of the worst deals ever made . Another humiliation came when president Obama drew a red line in Syria  and the whole world knew it meant nothing .

In Libya , our consulate  the symbol of American prestige around the globe  was brought down in flames . America is far less safe  and the world is far less stable  than when Obama made the decision to put Hillary Clinton in charge of America's foreign policy .

I am certain it is a decision he truly regrets . Her bad instincts and her bad judgment  something pointed out by Bernie Sanders  are what caused the disasters unfolding today . Let's review the record . In 2009 , pre Hillary , ISIS was not even on the map .

Libya was cooperating . Egypt was peaceful . Iraq was seeing a reduction in violence . Iran was being choked by sanctions . Syria was under control . After four years of Hillary Clinton , what do we have? ISIS has spread across the region , and the world . Libya is in ruins , and our Ambassador and his staff were left helpless to die at the hands of savage killers . Egypt was turned over to the radical Muslim brotherhood , forcing the military to retake control . Iraq is in chaos .

Iran is on the path to nuclear weapons . Syria is engulfed in a civil war and a refugee crisis that now threatens the West . After fifteen years of wars in the Middle East , after trillions of dollars spent and thousands of lives lost , the situation is worse than it has ever been before .

This is the legacy of Hillary Clinton: death , destruction and weakness .

But Hillary Clinton's legacy does not have to be America's legacy . The problems we face now  poverty and violence at home , war and destruction abroad  will last only as long as we continue relying on the same politicians who created them . A change in leadership is required to change these outcomes . Tonight , I will share with you my plan of action for America .

The most important difference between our plan and that of our opponents , is that our plan will put America First . Americanism , not globalism , will be our credo . As long as we are led by politicians who will not put America First , then we can be assured that other nations will not treat America with respect . This will all change in 2017 .

The American People will come first once again . My plan will begin with safety at home  which means safe neighborhoods , secure borders , and protection from terrorism . There can be no prosperity without law and order . On the economy , I will outline reforms to add millions of new jobs and trillions in new wealth that can be used to rebuild America .

A number of these reforms that I will outline tonight will be opposed by some of our nation's most powerful special interests . That is because these interests have rigged our political and economic system for their exclusive benefit .

Big business , elite media and major donors are lining up behind the campaign of my opponent because they know she will keep our rigged system in place . They are throwing money at her because they have total control over everything she does . She is their puppet , and they pull the strings .

That is why Hillary Clinton's message is that things will never change . My message is that things have to change  and they have to change right now . Every day I wake up determined to deliver for the people I have met all across this nation that have been neglected , ignored , and abandoned .

I have visited the laid off factory workers , and the communities crushed by our horrible and unfair trade deals . These are the forgotten men and women of our country . People who work hard but no longer have a voice .

I AM YOUR VOICE .

I have embraced crying mothers who have lost their children because our politicians put their personal agendas before the national good . I have no patience for injustice , no tolerance for government incompetence , no sympathy for leaders who fail their citizens .

When innocent people suffer , because our political system lacks the will , or the courage , or the basic decency to enforce our laws  or worse still , has sold out to some corporate lobbyist for cash  I am not able to look the other way .

And when a Secretary of State illegally stores her emails on a private server , deletes 33 ,000 of them so the authorities can't see her crime , puts our country at risk , lies about it in every different form and faces no consequence  I know that corruption has reached a level like never before .

When the FBI Director says that the Secretary of State was extremely careless and negligent , in handling our classified secrets , I also know that these terms are minor compared to what she actually did . They were just used to save her from facing justice for her terrible crimes .

In fact , her single greatest accomplishment may be committing such an egregious crime and getting away with it  especially when others have paid so dearly . When that same Secretary of State rakes in millions of dollars trading access and favors to special interests and foreign powers I know the time for action has come .

I have joined the political arena so that the powerful can no longer beat up on people that cannot defend themselves . Nobody knows the system better than me , which is why I alone can fix it . I have seen firsthand how the system is rigged against our citizens , just like it was rigged against Bernie Sanders  he never had a chance .

But his supporters will join our movement , because we will fix his biggest issue: trade . Millions of Democrats will join our movement because we are going to fix the system so it works for all Americans . In this cause , I am proud to have at my side the next Vice President of the United States: Governor Mike Pence of Indiana .

We will bring the same economic success to America that Mike brought to Indiana . He is a man of character and accomplishment . He is the right man for the job . The first task for our new Administration will be to liberate our citizens from the crime and terrorism and lawlessness that threatens their communities .

America was shocked to its core when our police officers in Dallas were brutally executed . In the days after Dallas , we have seen continued threats and violence against our law enforcement officials . Law officers have been shot or killed in recent days in Georgia , Missouri , Wisconsin , Kansas , Michigan and Tennessee .

On Sunday , more police were gunned down in Baton Rouge , Louisiana . Three were killed , and four were badly injured . An attack on law enforcement is an attack on all Americans . I have a message to every last person threatening the peace on our streets and the safety of our police: when I take the oath of office next year , I will restore law and order our country .
I will work with , and appoint , the best prosecutors and law enforcement officials in the country to get the job done . In this race for the White House , I am the Law And Order candidate . The irresponsible rhetoric of our President , who has used the pulpit of the presidency to divide us by race and color , has made America a more dangerous environment for everyone .

This Administration has failed America's inner cities . It's failed them on education . It's failed them on jobs . It's failed them on crime . It's failed them at every level .

When I am President , I will work to ensure that all of our kids are treated equally , and protected equally .

Every action I take , I will ask myself: does this make life better for young Americans in Baltimore , Chicago , Detroit , Ferguson who have as much of a right to live out their dreams as any other child America?

To make life safe in America , we must also address the growing threats we face from outside America: we are going to defeat the barbarians of ISIS . Once again , France is the victim of brutal Islamic terrorism .

Men , women and children viciously mowed down . Lives ruined . Families ripped apart . A nation in mourning .

The damage and devastation that can be inflicted by Islamic radicals has been over and over  at the World Trade Center , at an office party in San Bernardino , at the Boston Marathon , and a military recruiting center in Chattanooga , Tennessee .

Only weeks ago , in Orlando , Florida , 49 wonderful Americans were savagely murdered by an Islamic terrorist . This time , the terrorist targeted our LGBT community . As your President , I will do everything in my power to protect our LGBT citizens from the violence and oppression of a hateful foreign ideology . To protect us from terrorism , we need to focus on three things .

We must have the best intelligence gathering operation in the world . We must abandon the failed policy of nation building and regime change that Hillary Clinton pushed in Iraq , Libya , Egypt and Syria . Instead , we must work with all of our allies who share our goal of destroying ISIS and stamping out Islamic terror .

This includes working with our greatest ally in the region , the State of Israel . Lastly , we must immediately suspend immigration from any nation that has been compromised by terrorism until such time as proven vetting mechanisms have been put in place .

My opponent has called for a radical 550% increase in Syrian refugees on top of existing massive refugee flows coming into our country under President Obama . She proposes this despite the fact that there's no way to screen these refugees in order to find out who they are or where they come from . I only want to admit individuals into our country who will support our values and love our people .

Anyone who endorses violence , hatred or oppression is not welcome in our country and never will be .

Decades of record immigration have produced lower wages and higher unemployment for our citizens , especially for African American and Latino workers . We are going to have an immigration system that works , but one that works for the American people .

On Monday , we heard from three parents whose children were killed by illegal immigrants Mary Ann Mendoza , Sabine Durden , and Jamiel Shaw . They are just three brave representatives of many thousands . Of all my travels in this country , nothing has affected me more deeply than the time I have spent with the mothers and fathers who have lost their children to violence spilling across our border .

These families have no special interests to represent them . There are no demonstrators to protest on their behalf . My opponent will never meet with them , or share in their pain . Instead , my opponent wants Sanctuary Cities . But where was sanctuary for Kate Steinle? Where was Sanctuary for the children of Mary Ann , Sabine and Jamiel? Where was sanctuary for all the other Americans who have been so brutally murdered , and who have suffered so horribly?

These wounded American families have been alone . But they are alone no longer . Tonight , this candidate and this whole nation stand in their corner to support them , to send them our love , and to pledge in their honor that we will save countless more families from suffering the same awful fate .

We are going to build a great border wall to stop illegal immigration , to stop the gangs and the violence , and to stop the drugs from pouring into our communities . I have been honored to receive the endorsement of America's Border Patrol Agents , and will work directly with them to protect the integrity of our lawful immigration system .

By ending catch and release on the border , we will stop the cycle of human smuggling and violence . Illegal border crossings will go down . Peace will be restored . By enforcing the rules for the millions who overstay their visas , our laws will finally receive the respect they deserve .

Tonight , I want every American whose demands for immigration security have been denied  and every politician who has denied them  to listen very closely to the words I am about to say .

On January 21st of 2017 , the day after I take the oath of office , Americans will finally wake up in a country where the laws of the United States are enforced . We are going to be considerate and compassionate to everyone .

But my greatest compassion will be for our own struggling citizens . My plan is the exact opposite of the radical and dangerous immigration policy of Hillary Clinton . Americans want relief from uncontrolled immigration . Communities want relief .

Yet Hillary Clinton is proposing mass amnesty , mass immigration , and mass lawlessness . Her plan will overwhelm your schools and hospitals , further reduce your jobs and wages , and make it harder for recent immigrants to escape from poverty .

I have a different vision for our workers . It begins with a new , fair trade policy that protects our jobs and stands up to countries that cheat . It's been a signature message of my campaign from day one , and it will be a signature feature of my presidency from the moment I take the oath of office .

I have made billions of dollars in business making deals  now I'm going to make our country rich again . I am going to turn our bad trade agreements into great ones . America has lost nearly one third of its manufacturing jobs since 1997 , following the enactment of disastrous trade deals supported by Bill and Hillary Clinton .

Remember , it was Bill Clinton who signed NAFTA , one of the worst economic deals ever made by our country .

Never again .

I am going to bring our jobs back to Ohio and to America  and I am not going to let companies move to other countries , firing their employees along the way , without consequences .

My opponent , on the other hand , has supported virtually every trade agreement that has been destroying our middle class . She supported NAFTA , and she supported China's entrance into the World Trade Organization  another one of her husband's colossal mistakes .

She supported the job killing trade deal with South Korea . She has supported the Trans Pacific Partnership . The TPP will not only destroy our manufacturing , but it will make America subject to the rulings of foreign governments . I pledge to never sign any trade agreement that hurts our workers , or that diminishes our freedom and independence . Instead , I will make individual deals with individual countries .

No longer will we enter into these massive deals , with many countries , that are thousands of pages long  and which no one from our country even reads or understands . We are going to enforce all trade violations , including through the use of taxes and tariffs , against any country that cheats .

This includes stopping China's outrageous theft of intellectual property , along with their illegal product dumping , and their devastating currency manipulation . Our horrible trade agreements with China and many others , will be totally renegotiated . That includes renegotiating NAFTA to get a much better deal for America  and we'll walk away if we don't get the deal that we want . We are going to start building and making things again .

Next comes the reform of our tax laws , regulations and energy rules . While Hillary Clinton plans a massive tax increase , I have proposed the largest tax reduction of any candidate who has declared for the presidential race this year  Democrat or Republican . Middle income Americans will experience profound relief , and taxes will be simplified for everyone .

America is one of the highest taxed nations in the world . Reducing taxes will cause new companies and new jobs to come roaring back into our country . Then we are going to deal with the issue of regulation , one of the greatest job killers of them all . Excessive regulation is costing our country as much as $2 trillion a year , and we will end it . We are going to lift the restrictions on the production of American energy . This will produce more than $20 trillion in job creating economic activity over the next four decades .

My opponent , on the other hand , wants to put the great miners and steel workers of our country out of work  that will never happen when I am President . With these new economic policies , trillions of dollars will start flowing into our country .

This new wealth will improve the quality of life for all Americans  We will build the roads , highways , bridges , tunnels , airports , and the railways of tomorrow . This , in turn , will create millions more jobs . We will rescue kids from failing schools by helping their parents send them to a safe school of their choice .

My opponent would rather protect education bureaucrats than serve American children . We will repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare . You will be able to choose your own doctor again . And we will fix TSA at the airports! We will completely rebuild our depleted military , and the countries that we protect , at a massive loss , will be asked to pay their fair share .

We will take care of our great Veterans like they have never been taken care of before . My opponent dismissed the VA scandal as being not widespread  one more sign of how out of touch she really is . We are going to ask every Department Head in government to provide a list of wasteful spending projects that we can eliminate in my first 100 days . The politicians have talked about it , I'm going to do it . We are also going to appoint justices to the United States Supreme Court who will uphold our laws and our Constitution .

The replacement for Justice Scalia will be a person of similar views and principles . This will be one of the most important issues decided by this election . My opponent wants to essentially abolish the 2nd amendment . I , on the other hand , received the early and strong endorsement of the National Rifle Association and will protect the right of all Americans to keep their families safe .

At this moment , I would like to thank the evangelical community who have been so good to me and so supportive . You have so much to contribute to our politics , yet our laws prevent you from speaking your minds from your own pulpits .

An amendment , pushed by Lyndon Johnson , many years ago , threatens religious institutions with a loss of their tax exempt status if they openly advocate their political views .

I am going to work very hard to repeal that language and protect free speech for all Americans . We can accomplish these great things , and so much else  all we need to do is start believing in ourselves and in our country again . It is time to show the whole world that America Is Back  bigger , and better and stronger than ever before .

In this journey , I'm so lucky to have at my side my wife Melania and my wonderful children , Don , Ivanka , Eric , Tiffany , and Barron: you will always be my greatest source of pride and joy . My Dad , Fred Trump , was the smartest and hardest working man I ever knew . I wonder sometimes what he'd say if he were here to see this tonight .

It's because of him that I learned , from my youngest age , to respect the dignity of work and the dignity of working people . He was a guy most comfortable in the company of bricklayers , carpenters , and electricians and I have a lot of that in me also . Then there's my mother , Mary . She was strong , but also warm and fair minded . She was a truly great mother . She was also one of the most honest and charitable people I have ever known , and a great judge of character .

To my sisters Mary Anne and Elizabeth , my brother Robert and my late brother Fred , I will always give you my love you are most special to me . I have loved my life in business .

But now , my sole and exclusive mission is to go to work for our country  to go to work for all of you . It's time to deliver a victory for the American people . But to do that , we must break free from the petty politics of the past .

America is a nation of believers , dreamers , and strivers that is being led by a group of censors , critics , and cynics .

Remember: all of the people telling you that you can't have the country you want , are the same people telling you that I wouldn't be standing here tonight . No longer can we rely on those elites in media , and politics , who will say anything to keep a rigged system in place .

Instead , we must choose to Believe In America . History is watching us now .

It's waiting to see if we will rise to the occasion , and if we will show the whole world that America is still free and independent and strong .

My opponent asks her supporters to recite a three word loyalty pledge . It reads: I'm With Her . I choose to recite a different pledge .

My pledge reads: I'M WITH YOU THE AMERICAN PEOPLE

I am your voice .

So to every parent who dreams for their child , and every child who dreams for their future , I say these words to you tonight: I'm With You , and I will fight for you , and I will win for you .

To all Americans tonight , in all our cities and towns , I make this promise: We Will Make America Strong Again .

We Will Make America Proud Again .

We Will Make America Safe Again .

And We Will Make America Great Again .

THANK YOU .

We , the citizens of America , are now joined in a great national effort to rebuild our country and restore its promise for all of our people .

Together , we will determine the course of America and the world for many , many years to come . We will face challenges , we will confront hardships , but we will get the job done .

Every four years , we gather on these steps to carry out the orderly and peaceful transfer of power , and we are grateful to President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama for their gracious aid throughout this transition . They have been magnificent . Thank you .

Today's ceremony , however , has very special meaning because today , we are not merely transferring power from one administration to another or from one party to another , but we are transferring power from Washington , D .C . and giving it back to you , the people .
For too long , a small group in our nation's capital has reaped the rewards of government while the people have borne the cost . Washington flourished , but the people did not share in its wealth . Politicians prospered , but the jobs left and the factories closed . The establishment protected itself , but not the citizens of our country . Their victories have not been your victories . Their triumphs have not been your triumphs . And while they celebrated in our nation's capital , there was little to celebrate for struggling families all across our land .
That all changes starting right here and right now because this moment is your moment , it belongs to you .
It belongs to everyone gathered here today and everyone watching all across America . This is your day . This is your celebration . And this , the United States of America , is your country .
What truly matters is not which party controls our government , but whether our government is controlled by the people .
January 20th , 2017 will be remembered as the day the people became the rulers of this nation again .
The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer .
Everyone is listening to you now . You came by the tens of millions to become part of a historic movement , the likes of which the world has never seen before .

At the center of this movement is a crucial conviction , that a nation exists to serve its citizens . Americans want great schools for their children , safe neighborhoods for their families , and good jobs for themselves . These are just and reasonable demands of righteous people and a righteous public .

But for too many of our citizens , a different reality exists: mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our nation; an education system flush with cash , but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of all knowledge; and the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential .

This American carnage stops right here and stops right now .
We are one nation and their pain is our pain . Their dreams are our dreams . And their success will be our success . We share one heart , one home , and one glorious destiny . The oath of office I take today is an oath of allegiance to all Americans .
For many decades , we've enriched foreign industry at the expense of American industry; subsidized the armies of other countries , while allowing for the very sad depletion of our military . We've defended other nations' borders while refusing to defend our own .
And spent trillions and trillions of dollars overseas while America's infrastructure has fallen into disrepair and decay . We've made other countries rich , while the wealth , strength and confidence of our country has dissipated over the horizon .

One by one , the factories shuttered and left our shores , with not even a thought about the millions and millions of American workers that were left behind . The wealth of our middle class has been ripped from their homes and then redistributed all across the world .

But that is the past . And now , we are looking only to the future .
We assembled here today are issuing a new decree to be heard in every city , in every foreign capital , and in every hall of power . From this day forward , a new vision will govern our land . From this day forward , it's going to be only America first , America first .
Every decision on trade , on taxes , on immigration , on foreign affairs will be made to benefit American workers and American families . We must protect our borders from the ravages of other countries making our products , stealing our companies and destroying our jobs .
Protection will lead to great prosperity and strength . I will fight for you with every breath in my body and I will never ever let you down .
America will start winning again , winning like never before .
We will bring back our jobs . We will bring back our borders . We will bring back our wealth . And we will bring back our dreams .

We will build new roads and highways and bridges and airports and tunnels and railways all across our wonderful nation . We will get our people off of welfare and back to work , rebuilding our country with American hands and American labor .
We will follow two simple rules; buy American and hire American .

We will seek friendship and goodwill with the nations of the world , but we do so with the understanding that it is the right of all nations to put their own interests first . We do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone , but rather to let it shine as an example . We will shine for everyone to follow .
We will reinforce old alliances and form new ones and unite the civilized world against radical Islamic terrorism , which we will eradicate from the face of the Earth .
At the bedrock of our politics will be a total allegiance to the United States of America , and through our loyalty to our country , we will rediscover our loyalty to each other . When you open your heart to patriotism , there is no room for prejudice .
The Bible tells us how good and pleasant it is when God's people live together in unity . We must speak our minds openly , debate our disagreements honestly , but always pursue solidarity . When America is united , America is totally unstoppable .
There should be no fear . We are protected and we will always be protected . We will be protected by the great men and women of our military and law enforcement . And most importantly , we will be protected by God .

Finally , we must think big and dream even bigger . In America , we understand that a nation is only living as long as it is striving . We will no longer accept politicians who are all talk and no action , constantly complaining , but never doing anything about it .
The time for empty talk is over . Now arrives the hour of action .

Do not allow anyone to tell you that it cannot be done . No challenge can match the heart and fight and spirit of America . We will not fail . Our country will thrive and prosper again .

We stand at the birth of a new millennium , ready to unlock the mysteries of space , to free the earth from the miseries of disease , and to harness the energies , industries and technologies of tomorrow . A new national pride will stir ourselves , lift our sights and heal our divisions .

It's time to remember that old wisdom our soldiers will never forget , that whether we are black or brown or white , we all bleed the same red blood of patriots .
We all enjoy the same glorious freedoms and we all salute the same great American flag .
And whether a child is born in the urban sprawl of Detroit or the wind swept plains of Nebraska , they look up at the same night sky , they fill their heart with the same dreams , and they are infused with the breath of life by the same almighty creator .
So to all Americans in every city near and far , small and large , from mountain to mountain , from ocean to ocean , hear these words: You will never be ignored again .

Your voice , your hopes , and your dreams will define our American destiny . And your courage and goodness and love will forever guide us along the way .

Together , we will make America strong again . We will make America wealthy again . We will make America proud again . We will make America safe again . And yes , together we will make America great again .
Thank you . God bless you . And God bless America .
Thank you .God bless America .

Mr . Speaker , Mr . Vice President , Members of Congress , the First Lady of the United States , and Citizens of America:
Tonight , as we mark the conclusion of our celebration of Black History Month , we are reminded of our Nation's path toward civil rights and the work that still remains . Recent threats targeting Jewish Community Centers and vandalism of Jewish cemeteries , as well as last week's shooting in Kansas City , remind us that while we may be a Nation divided on policies , we are a country that stands united in condemning hate and evil in all its forms .
Each American generation passes the torch of truth , liberty and justice  in an unbroken chain all the way down to the present .
That torch is now in our hands . And we will use it to light up the world . I am here tonight to deliver a message of unity and strength , and it is a message deeply delivered from my heart .
A new chapter of American Greatness is now beginning .
A new national pride is sweeping across our Nation .
And a new surge of optimism is placing impossible dreams firmly within our grasp .
What we are witnessing today is the Renewal of the American Spirit .
Our allies will find that America is once again ready to lead .
All the nations of the world  friend or foe  will find that America is strong , America is proud , and America is free .
In 9 years , the United States will celebrate the 250th anniversary of our founding  250 years since the day we declared our Independence .
It will be one of the great milestones in the history of the world .
But what will America look like as we reach our 250th year? What kind of country will we leave for our children?
I will not allow the mistakes of recent decades past to define the course of our future .
For too long , we've watched our middle class shrink as we've exported our jobs and wealth to foreign countries .
We've financed and built one global project after another , but ignored the fates of our children in the inner cities of Chicago , Baltimore , Detroit  and so many other places throughout our land .
We've defended the borders of other nations , while leaving our own borders wide open , for anyone to cross  and for drugs to pour in at a now unprecedented rate .
And we've spent trillions of dollars overseas , while our infrastructure at home has so badly crumbled .
Then , in 2016 , the earth shifted beneath our feet . The rebellion started as a quiet protest , spoken by families of all colors and creeds  families who just wanted a fair shot for their children , and a fair hearing for their concerns .
But then the quiet voices became a loud chorus  as thousands of citizens now spoke out together , from cities small and large , all across our country .
Finally , the chorus became an earthquake  and the people turned out by the tens of millions , and they were all united by one very simple , but crucial demand , that America must put its own citizens first  . . . because only then , can we truly MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN .
Dying industries will come roaring back to life . Heroic veterans will get the care they so desperately need .
Our military will be given the resources its brave warriors so richly deserve .
Crumbling infrastructure will be replaced with new roads , bridges , tunnels , airports and railways gleaming across our beautiful land .
Our terrible drug epidemic will slow down and ultimately , stop .
And our neglected inner cities will see a rebirth of hope , safety , and opportunity .
Above all else , we will keep our promises to the American people .
It's been a little over a month since my inauguration , and I want to take this moment to update the Nation on the progress I've made in keeping those promises .
Since my election , Ford , Fiat Chrysler , General Motors , Sprint , Softbank , Lockheed , Intel , Walmart , and many others , have announced that they will invest billions of dollars in the United States and will create tens of thousands of new American jobs .
The stock market has gained almost three trillion dollars in value since the election on November 8th , a record . We've saved taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars by bringing down the price of the fantastic new F 35 jet fighter , and will be saving billions more dollars on contracts all across our Government . We have placed a hiring freeze on non military and non essential Federal workers .
We have begun to drain the swamp of government corruption by imposing a 5 year ban on lobbying by executive branch officials  and a lifetime ban on becoming lobbyists for a foreign government .
We have undertaken a historic effort to massively reduce job crushing regulations , creating a deregulation task force inside of every Government agency; imposing a new rule which mandates that for every 1 new regulation , 2 old regulations must be eliminated; and stopping a regulation that threatens the future and livelihoods of our great coal miners .
We have cleared the way for the construction of the Keystone and Dakota Access Pipelines  thereby creating tens of thousands of jobs  and I've issued a new directive that new American pipelines be made with American steel .
We have withdrawn the United States from the job killing Trans Pacific Partnership .
With the help of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau , we have formed a Council with our neighbors in Canada to help ensure that women entrepreneurs have access to the networks , markets and capital they need to start a business and live out their financial dreams .
To protect our citizens , I have directed the Department of Justice to form a Task Force on Reducing Violent Crime .
I have further ordered the Departments of Homeland Security and Justice , along with the Department of State and the Director of National Intelligence , to coordinate an aggressive strategy to dismantle the criminal cartels that have spread across our Nation .
We will stop the drugs from pouring into our country and poisoning our youth  and we will expand treatment for those who have become so badly addicted .
At the same time , my Administration has answered the pleas of the American people for immigration enforcement and border security . By finally enforcing our immigration laws , we will raise wages , help the unemployed , save billions of dollars , and make our communities safer for everyone . We want all Americans to succeed  but that can't happen in an environment of lawless chaos . We must restore integrity and the rule of law to our borders .
For that reason , we will soon begin the construction of a great wall along our southern border . It will be started ahead of schedule and , when finished , it will be a very effective weapon against drugs and crime .
As we speak , we are removing gang members , drug dealers and criminals that threaten our communities and prey on our citizens . Bad ones are going out as I speak tonight and as I have promised .
To any in Congress who do not believe we should enforce our laws , I would ask you this question: what would you say to the American family that loses their jobs , their income , or a loved one , because America refused to uphold its laws and defend its borders?
Our obligation is to serve , protect , and defend the citizens of the United States . We are also taking strong measures to protect our Nation from Radical Islamic Terrorism .
According to data provided by the Department of Justice , the vast majority of individuals convicted for terrorism related offenses since 9/11 came here from outside of our country . We have seen the attacks at home  from Boston to San Bernardino to the Pentagon and yes , even the World Trade Center .
We have seen the attacks in France , in Belgium , in Germany and all over the world .
It is not compassionate , but reckless , to allow uncontrolled entry from places where proper vetting cannot occur . Those given the high honor of admission to the United States should support this country and love its people and its values .
We cannot allow a beachhead of terrorism to form inside America  we cannot allow our Nation to become a sanctuary for extremists .
That is why my Administration has been working on improved vetting procedures , and we will shortly take new steps to keep our Nation safe  and to keep out those who would do us harm .
As promised , I directed the Department of Defense to develop a plan to demolish and destroy ISIS  a network of lawless savages that have slaughtered Muslims and Christians , and men , women , and children of all faiths and beliefs . We will work with our allies , including our friends and allies in the Muslim world , to extinguish this vile enemy from our planet .
I have also imposed new sanctions on entities and individuals who support Iran's ballistic missile program , and reaffirmed our unbreakable alliance with the State of Israel .
Finally , I have kept my promise to appoint a Justice to the United States Supreme Court  from my list of 20 judges  who will defend our Constitution . I am honored to have Maureen Scalia with us in the gallery tonight . Her late , great husband , Antonin Scalia , will forever be a symbol of American justice . To fill his seat , we have chosen Judge Neil Gorsuch , a man of incredible skill , and deep devotion to the law . He was confirmed unanimously to the Court of Appeals , and I am asking the Senate to swiftly approve his nomination .
Tonight , as I outline the next steps we must take as a country , we must honestly acknowledge the circumstances we inherited .
Ninety four million Americans are out of the labor force .
Over 43 million people are now living in poverty , and over 43 million Americans are on food stamps .
More than 1 in 5 people in their prime working years are not working .
We have the worst financial recovery in 65 years .
In the last 8 years , the past Administration has put on more new debt than nearly all other Presidents combined .
We've lost more than one fourth of our manufacturing jobs since NAFTA was approved , and we've lost 60 ,000 factories since China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001 .
Our trade deficit in goods with the world last year was nearly $800 billion dollars .
And overseas , we have inherited a series of tragic foreign policy disasters .
Solving these , and so many other pressing problems , will require us to work past the differences of party . It will require us to tap into the American spirit that has overcome every challenge throughout our long and storied history .
But to accomplish our goals at home and abroad , we must restart the engine of the American economy  making it easier for companies to do business in the United States , and much harder for companies to leave .
Right now , American companies are taxed at one of the highest rates anywhere in the world .
My economic team is developing historic tax reform that will reduce the tax rate on our companies so they can compete and thrive anywhere and with anyone . At the same time , we will provide massive tax relief for the middle class .
We must create a level playing field for American companies and workers .
Currently , when we ship products out of America , many other countries make us pay very high tariffs and taxes  but when foreign companies ship their products into America , we charge them almost nothing .
I just met with officials and workers from a great American company , Harley Davidson . In fact , they proudly displayed five of their magnificent motorcycles , made in the USA , on the front lawn of the White House .
At our meeting , I asked them , how are you doing , how is business? They said that it's good . I asked them further how they are doing with other countries , mainly international sales . They told me  without even complaining because they have been mistreated for so long that they have become used to it  that it is very hard to do business with other countries because they tax our goods at such a high rate . They said that in one case another country taxed their motorcycles at 100 percent .
They weren't even asking for change . But I am .
I believe strongly in free trade but it also has to be FAIR TRADE .
The first Republican President , Abraham Lincoln , warned that the "abandonment of the protective policy by the American Government [will] produce want and ruin among our people ."
Lincoln was right  and it is time we heeded his words . I am not going to let America and its great companies and workers , be taken advantage of anymore .
I am going to bring back millions of jobs . Protecting our workers also means reforming our system of legal immigration . The current , outdated system depresses wages for our poorest workers , and puts great pressure on taxpayers .
Nations around the world , like Canada , Australia and many others  have a merit based immigration system . It is a basic principle that those seeking to enter a country ought to be able to support themselves financially . Yet , in America , we do not enforce this rule , straining the very public resources that our poorest citizens rely upon . According to the National Academy of Sciences , our current immigration system costs America's taxpayers many billions of dollars a year .
Switching away from this current system of lower skilled immigration , and instead adopting a merit based system , will have many benefits: it will save countless dollars , raise workers' wages , and help struggling families  including immigrant families  enter the middle class .
I believe that real and positive immigration reform is possible , as long as we focus on the following goals: to improve jobs and wages for Americans , to strengthen our nation's security , and to restore respect for our laws .
If we are guided by the well being of American citizens then I believe Republicans and Democrats can work together to achieve an outcome that has eluded our country for decades .
Another Republican President , Dwight D . Eisenhower , initiated the last truly great national infrastructure program  the building of the interstate highway system . The time has come for a new program of national rebuilding .
America has spent approximately six trillion dollars in the Middle East , all this while our infrastructure at home is crumbling . With this six trillion dollars we could have rebuilt our country  twice . And maybe even three times if we had people who had the ability to negotiate .
To launch our national rebuilding , I will be asking the Congress to approve legislation that produces a $1 trillion investment in the infrastructure of the United States  financed through both public and private capital  creating millions of new jobs .
This effort will be guided by two core principles: Buy American , and Hire American .
Tonight , I am also calling on this Congress to repeal and replace Obamacare with reforms that expand choice , increase access , lower costs , and at the same time , provide better Healthcare .
Mandating every American to buy government approved health insurance was never the right solution for America . The way to make health insurance available to everyone is to lower the cost of health insurance , and that is what we will do .
Obamacare premiums nationwide have increased by double and triple digits . As an example , Arizona went up 116 percent last year alone . Governor Matt Bevin of Kentucky just said Obamacare is failing in his State  it is unsustainable and collapsing .
One third of counties have only one insurer on the exchanges  leaving many Americans with no choice at all .
Remember when you were told that you could keep your doctor , and keep your plan?
We now know that all of those promises have been broken .
Obamacare is collapsing  and we must act decisively to protect all Americans . Action is not a choice  it is a necessity .
So I am calling on all Democrats and Republicans in the Congress to work with us to save Americans from this imploding Obamacare disaster .
Here are the principles that should guide the Congress as we move to create a better healthcare system for all Americans:
First , we should ensure that Americans with pre existing conditions have access to coverage , and that we have a stable transition for Americans currently enrolled in the healthcare exchanges .
Secondly , we should help Americans purchase their own coverage , through the use of tax credits and expanded Health Savings Accounts  but it must be the plan they want , not the plan forced on them by the Government .
Thirdly , we should give our great State Governors the resources and flexibility they need with Medicaid to make sure no one is left out .
Fourthly , we should implement legal reforms that protect patients and doctors from unnecessary costs that drive up the price of insurance  and work to bring down the artificially high price of drugs and bring them down immediately .
Finally , the time has come to give Americans the freedom to purchase health insurance across State lines  creating a truly competitive national marketplace that will bring cost way down and provide far better care .
Everything that is broken in our country can be fixed . Every problem can be solved . And every hurting family can find healing , and hope .
Our citizens deserve this , and so much more  so why not join forces to finally get it done? On this and so many other things , Democrats and Republicans should get together and unite for the good of our country , and for the good of the American people .
My administration wants to work with members in both parties to make childcare accessible and affordable , to help ensure new parents have paid family leave , to invest in women's health , and to promote clean air and clear water , and to rebuild our military and our infrastructure .
True love for our people requires us to find common ground , to advance the common good , and to cooperate on behalf of every American child who deserves a brighter future .
An incredible young woman is with us this evening who should serve as an inspiration to us all .
Today is Rare Disease day , and joining us in the gallery is a Rare Disease Survivor , Megan Crowley . Megan was diagnosed with Pompe Disease , a rare and serious illness , when she was 15 months old . She was not expected to live past 5 .
On receiving this news , Megan's dad , John , fought with everything he had to save the life of his precious child . He founded a company to look for a cure , and helped develop the drug that saved Megan's life . Today she is 20 years old  and a sophomore at Notre Dame .
Megan's story is about the unbounded power of a father's love for a daughter .
But our slow and burdensome approval process at the Food and Drug Administration keeps too many advances , like the one that saved Megan's life , from reaching those in need .
If we slash the restraints , not just at the FDA but across our Government , then we will be blessed with far more miracles like Megan .
In fact , our children will grow up in a Nation of miracles .
But to achieve this future , we must enrich the mind  and the souls  of every American child .
Education is the civil rights issue of our time .
I am calling upon Members of both parties to pass an education bill that funds school choice for disadvantaged youth , including millions of African American and Latino children . These families should be free to choose the public , private , charter , magnet , religious or home school that is right for them .
Joining us tonight in the gallery is a remarkable woman , Denisha Merriweather . As a young girl , Denisha struggled in school and failed third grade twice . But then she was able to enroll in a private center for learning , with the help of a tax credit scholarship program . Today , she is the first in her family to graduate , not just from high school , but from college . Later this year she will get her masters degree in social work .
We want all children to be able to break the cycle of poverty just like Denisha .
But to break the cycle of poverty , we must also break the cycle of violence .
The murder rate in 2015 experienced its largest single year increase in nearly half a century .
In Chicago , more than 4 ,000 people were shot last year alone  and the murder rate so far this year has been even higher .
This is not acceptable in our society .
Every American child should be able to grow up in a safe community , to attend a great school , and to have access to a high paying job .
But to create this future , we must work with  not against  the men and women of law enforcement .
We must build bridges of cooperation and trust  not drive the wedge of disunity and division .
Police and sheriffs are members of our community . They are friends and neighbors , they are mothers and fathers , sons and daughters  and they leave behind loved ones every day who worry whether or not they'll come home safe and sound .
We must support the incredible men and women of law enforcement .
And we must support the victims of crime .
I have ordered the Department of Homeland Security to create an office to serve American Victims . The office is called VOICE  Victims Of Immigration Crime Engagement . We are providing a voice to those who have been ignored by our media , and silenced by special interests .
Joining us in the audience tonight are four very brave Americans whose government failed them .
Their names are Jamiel Shaw , Susan Oliver , Jenna Oliver , and Jessica Davis .
Jamiel's 17 year old son was viciously murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member , who had just been released from prison . Jamiel Shaw Jr . was an incredible young man , with unlimited potential who was getting ready to go to college where he would have excelled as a great quarterback . But he never got the chance . His father , who is in the audience tonight , has become a good friend of mine .
Also with us are Susan Oliver and Jessica Davis . Their husbands  Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver and Detective Michael Davis  were slain in the line of duty in California . They were pillars of their community . These brave men were viciously gunned down by an illegal immigrant with a criminal record and two prior deportations .
Sitting with Susan is her daughter , Jenna . Jenna: I want you to know that your father was a hero , and that tonight you have the love of an entire country supporting you and praying for you .
To Jamiel , Jenna , Susan and Jessica: I want you to know  we will never stop fighting for justice . Your loved ones will never be forgotten , we will always honor their memory .
Finally , to keep America Safe we must provide the men and women of the United States military with the tools they need to prevent war and  if they must  to fight and to win .
I am sending the Congress a budget that rebuilds the military , eliminates the Defense sequester , and calls for one of the largest increases in national defense spending in American history .
My budget will also increase funding for our veterans .
Our veterans have delivered for this Nation  and now we must deliver for them .
The challenges we face as a Nation are great . But our people are even greater .
And none are greater or braver than those who fight for America in uniform .
We are blessed to be joined tonight by Carryn Owens , the widow of a U .S . Navy Special Operator , Senior Chief William "Ryan" Owens . Ryan died as he lived: a warrior , and a hero  battling against terrorism and securing our Nation .
I just spoke to General Mattis , who reconfirmed that , and I quote , "Ryan was a part of a highly successful raid that generated large amounts of vital intelligence that will lead to many more victories in the future against our enemies ." Ryan's legacy is etched into eternity . For as the Bible teaches us , there is no greater act of love than to lay down one's life for one's friends . Ryan laid down his life for his friends , for his country , and for our freedom  we will never forget him .
To those allies who wonder what kind of friend America will be , look no further than the heroes who wear our uniform .
Our foreign policy calls for a direct , robust and meaningful engagement with the world . It is American leadership based on vital security interests that we share with our allies across the globe .
We strongly support NATO , an alliance forged through the bonds of two World Wars that dethroned fascism , and a Cold War that defeated communism .
But our partners must meet their financial obligations .
And now , based on our very strong and frank discussions , they are beginning to do just that .
We expect our partners , whether in NATO , in the Middle East , or the Pacific  to take a direct and meaningful role in both strategic and military operations , and pay their fair share of the cost .
We will respect historic institutions , but we will also respect the sovereign rights of nations .
Free nations are the best vehicle for expressing the will of the people  and America respects the right of all nations to chart their own path . My job is not to represent the world . My job is to represent the United States of America . But we know that America is better off , when there is less conflict  not more .
We must learn from the mistakes of the past  we have seen the war and destruction that have raged across our world .
The only long term solution for these humanitarian disasters is to create the conditions where displaced persons can safely return home and begin the long process of rebuilding .
America is willing to find new friends , and to forge new partnerships , where shared interests align . We want harmony and stability , not war and conflict .
We want peace , wherever peace can be found . America is friends today with former enemies . Some of our closest allies , decades ago , fought on the opposite side of these World Wars . This history should give us all faith in the possibilities for a better world .
Hopefully , the 250th year for America will see a world that is more peaceful , more just and more free .
On our 100th anniversary , in 1876 , citizens from across our Nation came to Philadelphia to celebrate America's centennial . At that celebration , the country's builders and artists and inventors showed off their creations .
Alexander Graham Bell displayed his telephone for the first time .
Remington unveiled the first typewriter . An early attempt was made at electric light .
Thomas Edison showed an automatic telegraph and an electric pen .
Imagine the wonders our country could know in America's 250th year .
Think of the marvels we can achieve if we simply set free the dreams of our people .
Cures to illnesses that have always plagued us are not too much to hope .
American footprints on distant worlds are not too big a dream .
Millions lifted from welfare to work is not too much to expect .
And streets where mothers are safe from fear  schools where children learn in peace  and jobs where Americans prosper and grow  are not too much to ask .
When we have all of this , we will have made America greater than ever before . For all Americans .
This is our vision . This is our mission .
But we can only get there together .
We are one people , with one destiny .
We all bleed the same blood .
We all salute the same flag .
And we are all made by the same God .
And when we fulfill this vision; when we celebrate our 250 years of glorious freedom , we will look back on tonight as when this new chapter of American Greatness began .
The time for small thinking is over . The time for trivial fights is behind us .
We just need the courage to share the dreams that fill our hearts .
The bravery to express the hopes that stir our souls .
And the confidence to turn those hopes and dreams to action .
From now on , America will be empowered by our aspirations , not burdened by our fears 
inspired by the future , not bound by the failures of the past 
and guided by our vision , not blinded by our doubts .
I am asking all citizens to embrace this Renewal of the American Spirit . I am asking all members of Congress to join me in dreaming big , and bold and daring things for our country . And I am asking everyone watching tonight to seize this moment and 
Believe in yourselves .
Believe in your future .
And believe , once more , in America .
Thank you , God bless you , and God Bless these United States .
